Rich, Michael, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
Awesome to have you both back on the show.
Yeah, thanks for having us.
Yeah, for sure.
We're going to talk about great things.
I know it's going to be a great show.
It's undoubtable, right?
I have no doubt.
It's a great day, you know, and we're ready for, I think, what's going to be a great chat.
about great docs, great tables, all of those things.
All the great things.
Yeah.
So I had you on to talk about Great Tables, which was really fun.
You're all both from Posit.
Yeah.
And other than that, maybe let's do a quick introduction for folks.
I mean, I don't know why anybody would not have listened to the Great Tables episode, but in case they haven't.
No, we honestly, we get a bunch of new listeners all the time.
So yeah, let's do a quick round of introductions.
Who are you?
What do you do?
Why are you working on this project?
Rich, start with you.
Yeah, I'm Rich.
I work at Posit, PVC.
I've been doing traditionally lots of R stuff, like in the past, but more lately.
This is like the last three or four years, a lot more Python stuff.
And actually, Michael, who's with me today, he taught me a lot about Python.
Like, I was pretty bad starting.
I mean, I used it in the past, but open source stuff, I was bad.
Michael has so much patience though.
So he helped me get speed over a period of a year or so.
So I owe a lot to him.
And he's a great guy.
That's really cool.
I agree with that.
I think it's hard to change a language.
It's hard to switch to another language.
Maybe you could speak to that real quick before Michael jumps in.
I've done that a couple of times.
know you spend so much time and energy and effort and getting really good at a not just the language the tools the ecosystem everything and they're like i'm one oh i think i have to go over there
for a while yeah it feels like a bizarre situation like i know what i could be doing what should be doing like theoretically but things just don't jive sometimes it's like oh yeah but then you
then you get used to it and then your previous language degrades it's kind of like that sort of
it's a little bit a little bit sad in that regard but you know for me the real challenge was i'm i have such a deep knowledge and mastery of this technology and if i switch at least the first
time or two i did i feel like i'm gonna go back to the newbie-est of noobs and it's gonna feel really bad and i worked so hard for this knowledge and this experience why am i you know why am i
going to do this maybe i should never do that it was really it was a big deal for me maybe you could I want to say that for other people out there who are not necessarily going R to Python, but just one tech to another.
Yeah, it's humbling, like I said.
And, well, you know, with a good venture and lots of patience, it can happen.
Yeah, it's good to expand your skills, but the initial decision is rough.
Michael, you've been shepherding rich along the way.
I love it.
Tell us about yourself.
Yeah, I wouldn't even say shepherding.
or maybe there's like some mutual shepherding going on.
So I'm Michael Chow.
I'm a software engineer at Posit and have been for about four years on the open source team.
Yeah.
And I, so I've worked with Rich on things like great tables.
And I think that, yeah, I'm really interested in Python. I work on Python full time.
It, I think if I had to send back what, what Rich is really good at, Rich just has this crazy freaky sense of style.
And I think that's one thing that's drawn me to work with him on things is you just never know.
Like, to be totally honest, people at Paws just never know what Rich is going to pull out.
And I don't think any of us could have imagined it.
He's a loose, he's our wild card.
And it's been interesting because you can imagine like a programming language.
Yeah, you could be like, oh, this person taught me this programming language.
I don't really know how you teach Rich's style, but I feel like I'm kind of along for the ride.
I'm like eating popcorn, helping out.
And I think tools like Great Docs really reflect that, this interesting sense of style.
Great tables.
He's just dipped into this rich history of table styling.
How would you style it to present and maybe publish it?
And so I've been excited to be along for the ride to just watch him cook and bring this unique sense of kind of like style and design into tools.
Yeah, that's really cool.
You know, certain people just have a knack for APIs and the way that develop, you know, the developer UX sort of thing.
That's cool.
I personally am excited for the mascot.
The mascots.
Rich, I blew your cover.
We were, yeah, so Michael and I were talking a little bit at PyCon about Tablin, how you're.
Tablin, yes.
He hasn't been trying to talk about it very much.
Mascot wizard.
Yeah.
Who is Tablin, though, I wonder.
He's just a little table guy, a little table dude, and appears, gives you help, and then disappears just as fast.
Right.
He hasn't fully realized that yet.
He's always thinking of you.
He's never thinking of himself.
You know, he's showing up, helping you out.
He's like the new Clippy or Bob,
but much cooler because he's a table.
He can display things.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
And I do think this speaks to our dynamic where Tablin just appeared one day.
While we were preparing a PyCon talk two years ago, Tablin just appeared in the slides.
And I didn't know who Tablin was.
And I was like, who or what is this?
It was like a slide of a table.
And Tablin was popped out on the side was saying, good job.
And I was like, who's this spreadsheet with eyes and a mouth cheering people on?
And Richard was like, it's Tablin, of course.
Yeah.
It's helpful to have a little dude that just wants to help.
It's like having a pet, like a cat.
I love it.
That's really good.
So, Michael, we had the great opportunity to meet up at PyCon just last week.
I don't know how you feel about it.
Personally, I'm still just a little bit recovering from the whole energy that was extracted from me.
But it was really fun.
Maybe give us your thoughts on PyCon and how'd that go?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's a great question.
It's so interesting because we work on tools for data analysis.
But PyCon is much more general.
It's almost like all things Python.
I think it's a really interesting conference versus like a PyData or a SciPy, which are way oriented towards like data tools specifically.
But I love it.
I find it really nice to be able to drop in and talk to just the full range of Python people who maybe have never used or done a lot of data analysis.
So I find it really interesting to talk to folks who maybe almost universally, I think everybody has touched Pandas, the library for DataFrames.
And so that's the like funny kind of like point you can always talk to anyone about at PyCon.
But I find it really nice.
And I find the like PyCon organizers and the sort of Python Software Foundation.
It's just so down to earth that, yeah, I really love dropping in.
It doesn't feel super corporate.
It feels like they're really like a group of passionate volunteers putting this like pretty big conference on.
So, yeah, I always love dropping in, even if it's like a kind of broader audience than the like data crew.
I'm curious your experience.
Have you gone to a lot of PyCons?
I think my first one, when was my first?
Mid-teens, I would say 2015, 2016, something like that.
Yeah, nice.
I'd probably have gone to maybe two thirds since then.
Most.
I mean, we did have COVID in the middle. That was challenging.
But yeah, I've been to a fair number and I really enjoy it.
For me, it's just nice to get together, meet folks like you and everyone else and just kind of remember, hey, this is a community of humans and not just docs.
Never mind. I mean, docs are great. We're going to talk about how great docs can be.
But like, it's also nice to just have these human connections and just connect with people outside of with, but also outside of technology.
Right.
Like, hey, let's just go sit in the sun for a while and talk.
Like, have you seen the sun lately? No, I haven't seen it either.
Let's go sit there.
All day.
Yeah.
Yeah, for real.
I feel like it is just, just putting the face behind the name or actually like touching down to chat is does seem like a huge thing that you only do like say once or twice a year.
Yeah.
At least for me, I can come back and revitalize to, to do more.
So that's really, really sweet.
Let's start our journey here.
Talking about, let's just do a quick review of great tables.
Because I know Great Tables was one of the inspirations for Great Docs.
So we both got together, all three of us got together last year, I guess, to talk about Great Tables.
So who wants to just do a quick reminder of this one?
I'll go.
So basically, yeah, Great Tables, it's a, maybe not many people know this, it's a port of an R package called GT.
Not that important, but the idea is as good as it was then.
You want display tables, what I call them.
Essentially summary tables, like static tables.
And you want to present them, say, in a notebook or, say, in some other publishable document as HTML.
We also have a LaTeX output format.
But the idea is you compose tables step by step.
You add a header.
You want a title.
You get that, too.
You structure the table.
You can format different cells, usually entire columns of cells, and you can also style a table, which could be changing orders, adding cell backgrounds, things like that.
And really the idea is to make a table that you might see in a print publication, but using your data directly, using a data frame.
So you have the data in a form which is amenable to a summary table, And then in just a few method calls, you've got the table.
You know what's, yeah, that's awesome.
What strikes me about this, when we had our conversation last year, is just how much more there is to think about with tables than just an Excel-like thing.
I came away realizing that it goes way deeper and there's a lot more nuance.
It felt a little bit like, oh gosh, I can't remember the guy's name, but I'm sure you both have seen his books.
But it's, maybe I know.
Is this Tufte?
No, no, no.
Tufte.
Tufte, yes.
Okay.
It's just like, oh, I see.
Like there's some lines and stuff like, no, no, no, no.
Hold on.
There's a lot going on.
Like there's many things you can communicate subtly without just being like, well, let's just call this out.
Like, no, you don't even have to call it out.
It's communicated through something more interesting.
You know, a tough idea is that about just presenting sort of scientific information in general, but I felt that way about tables as well.
Yeah, it's pretty well.
We talked about this in our talk a few years back in PyCon, how, like, you can tell a story with a table where you can communicate data in a better way, in a, not a more optimized way, but a more legible way,
where like your main point is like describe like a title and a subtitle and you have notes at the bottom and you can guide people through an analysis summary that way.
And so just like with many different things, there's a good way to do it or a better way to do it.
Yeah. There's, you can just look at certain types of presented information and you go, well, that looks really professional or that looks really, really good, but I don't know why.
You know what I mean?
yeah that was good but i don't yes i but i i can't put my hand my finger on like exactly what is really different but that's really good and that's not you know and i feel like
great tables kind of leans into that yeah i guess it takes the tufty principle to like having just the right amount of ink i guess like not too much just enough to communicate
um the structure of things like the sort of like the architecture of the data you're laying out and not doing much more of that.
So there's a lot of that that goes into this.
Indeed.
As a default thing.
To the Tufte point too, Tufte's website, Tufte has like all of these just dumps of examples, just like example plot, example plot, example plot.
It's almost like a very rough notebook.
And I feel like with great tables, it was kind of similar.
Like when I first came on, I knew basically nothing about this topic.
And I saw the components of the table diagram.
So you have it pulled up, but it has like a table broken apart into all its pieces, like a title, subtitle.
There's this funny thing called the stub head and spanners.
And I thought, like, does a person really need to know all this?
But I think to the point of Tufte, like maybe what you're getting out to is Tufte really dives into like very specific, almost like dimensions of how you could represent data.
One thing he gets really into is like sparklines, this idea that like how far could you get with a line that basically doesn't have any axis labels, but it's just like a trend.
Like, is it going up or is it going down?
And that happens a lot in tables.
you'll put like these sparklines in a cell.
Like if you're looking at stocks, you'll have like the stock numbers and then you'll have a sparkline that like indicates the kind of trend so people can grab it really fast.
But I find what's interesting about Tufte is just that willingness to dive in so detailed about this one very specific action.
And I feel like this table diagram is sort of similar to me, the willingness to like break it apart so thoroughly.
at first I wasn't really convinced it seemed like a lot of work but yeah I think to your point about Tufte once you start looking at examples you start to realize this kind of captures the like flavor or design of like good examples
out there in the world
yeah I think it's really out there like initially my idea too is like oh is this too much but naming things is so important otherwise you're just awkwardly describing something over and over again like that cell to the top left or these cells off to the side.
And eventually you just have to give it a name, even if it's not the best name.
And these are actually names I stole from like basically a census manual on tables, I think written in 1949.
Great ideas, like wonderful book.
And it's on the web as a PDF still.
It's a scheme.
Yeah, I remember us talking about that.
How interesting is it?
Yeah, how interesting is it that the inspiration comes from pre-digital times.
And I think that a lot of the software reduces some of these ideas.
It's like, well, I have grids.
I have a grid of cells and sometimes the rows can be taller.
Sometimes you can span a row.
Okay, that's that.
But if you just write it by hand when you have to way back in the day, It's like, oh, well, maybe we could draw it differently, right?
Yeah.
And it's like I was like searching, like researching, like anything on tables I could find just to get ideas and like, you know, like what people thought was good.
And it's really hard to find anything on tables.
It's like, oh, but I did find that one thing.
And like I'm forever in debt to the person who wrote it.
Yeah, that's awesome.
So let's move on.
But if people are out there and they're doing presentations that involve tables, and especially if it's code generating those tables, check this out.
It's quite interesting.
So the next thing I want to talk about is just sort of surveying the landscape of what is out there.
Because we're going to talk about great docs, and great docs can generate static sites.
There's some existing tools that generate docs as static site.
There's some really good tools that just generate static sites that maybe people could put into docs.
There's a lot of things that are somewhat similar.
There's also stuff that's in the same space but different.
So maybe we could kind of go through and, you know, like, I know you all have mentioned Sphinx is a real popular one in the Python space.
There's MKDocs.
I had Martin from Zensical on not too long ago.
So maybe we could talk first about some of the existing tools that are, I guess, as similar as possible to what you're doing.
Yeah.
Michael, would you like to speak on this?
Because I know you did a deep dive recently on these.
Yeah.
So Sphinx, I think, and maybe to kick off some helpful context to great docs is that, yeah, I worked a lot on early support for documentation with a tool called quartodoc.
but rich actually took it to the next level and this goes to i think rich's style um with great docs so i have a lot of bizarre like experience looking at the history of python docs
um i think sphinx is one of the og uh site builders um i i can't i think this is the case so i i think one interesting fact is as i understand it i think python.org don't quote
me on this i think it was originally done in like latex or something like that the python docs
and i i think that they moved to sphinx at some point um so like sphinx has a really interesting
history in python like if you go back 25 30 years python docs had to exist using some tool right and
some point Sphinx emerged as kind of like this dominant site builder for Python and Python docs.
Yeah, does it say?
Yeah, so Python docs are in Sphinx.
You know, this Python doc site has a how-to, Python how-to's.
This is another weird fact.
The how-to's emerged.
I don't remember exactly when they emerged.
It was like in the last 30 years, I think, as part of the Linux project.
So the term how-to, as I understand it, emerged in the Linux docs.
But all these things, like it's so funny, we see them today and maybe it seems we just think about like, oh, there's the Python docs.
But actually at a certain point, you know, Sphinx emerged, this concept of a how-to emerged.
these are all things that over the last i think like 30 years um sort of like came into existence
so sphinx is like the og doc site um a lot of tools use it pandas uses it to generate its apis
um polar's uses it as well so some really big python tools use it to generate their um api docs It uses this thing called restructured text.
I will say, like, I don't know that a lot of open tool developers love it.
I'm going to be a bit careful here because I think it's been so useful.
But I do think that restructured text is kind of not the thing most open source developers are reaching for these days.
But Sphinx is like the OG doc site, and it powers a ton of docs like python.org and pandas.
Yeah.
I'm sure it was really made a huge improvement when it came out, though, right?
Yeah, I think it's...
If you're doing a LITEC before, that's got to be pretty rough.
It's like zero to one, essentially, I think, switching from LITEC to Sphinx for your Python docs.
Yeah. And if I see an RST file, it's just a little tear wells up in my eye. I'm like, oh gosh, here we go.
It's almost like a rite of passage, I feel like. As a Python developer producing docs in the Sphinx world, you just kind of like... I learned Sphinx and RST to generate docs, essentially.
It's like, yeah, I feel like that was my rite of passage into software development.
Yeah.
100%.
So we've also got MkDocs or McDocs probably.
I always feel like.
I say McDocs, but I have no I mean, you had the people, so I feel like they do you ever
read on it? If I try to remember, I feel like Martin said MKDocs, but he could have easily said McDocs and I was not paying attention.
I'm a major officer I think that makes sense a lot of these that could be said one way or another I really wish on their GitHub repo they just have a little mp3 here's how you say it
a little audio button
yeah exactly like a green unicorn like Gunicorn versus gunicorn is one that I think goes around and around still So Zensical is one of the more modern ones.
So I think that that's pretty interesting.
Honestly, I'm not sure how much it lands in the Sphinx, McDox world or in the other, maybe the just pure static site generator side of things.
So, yeah, go ahead.
The Zensical folks came on and probably have the best sense, my sense is it's also meant to be kind of a, I might be wrong, drop-in replacement for MkDocs.
I know they're It
is, yeah, yeah. It is a compatibility, at least compatible for a material for MkDocs.
Yeah, right,
right, right, right. Yeah,
for sure.
So yeah, I would say it's in that realm.
It also seems like they're heading towards general purpose or knowledge bases, which goes maybe a bit beyond just like Yes,
exactly.
That was my uncertainty is, do I classify it right because it's it doesn't even necessarily if you look at their h2 it doesn't say the best way to make your docs right it's it's a
scalable way for technical writing yeah right which makes it I think land a little more in the Hugo or ghost side of things so that's another part to part
to talk about is just like static sites in general you know why would I choose say Sphinx over Hugo or Hugo over Sphinx or something like that.
Yeah,
it seems a bit like Mintlefy. They have the same sort of thing going to they do documentation sites, but they go a bit beyond.
It's like general purpose, lots of different languages supported.
But it is documentation, but not really so much like a site, like just general purpose site generator.
So Hugo and Ghost, I don't know Ghost very well, but Hugo, for example, I use that a lot for blogs.
I've seen one of my friends does really cool stuff just in general with Hugo, making general purpose sites.
I feel like this is much more focused on I just need a static site and much less I need it to read my doc strings and categorize my modules and API calls and put in that kind of stuff.
So that's another realm that is similar to what you all are doing, but certainly not the same.
Yeah.
If you want to throw another one in, there's Quarto, that by the company we work at, Posit, and that does sites and much more beyond.
Yeah, I had JJ on, and I'm so sorry.
I'm forgetting the name of the other guy.
Oh, Charles.
Yeah, I think it was Charles.
Oh, cool.
I did talk about Quarto a little while ago.
That was fun.
Yeah.
I do think a lot of the questions with like Hugo versus something more targeted at like docs for a tool is hitting on kind of like, what are the parts of a doc site?
You know, like what's technical writing versus like package documentation.
Am I just doing a Hugo thing?
Like is what I'm doing similar enough to like a blog or a website with content?
which is really common like my websites in hugo um or do i need something special to like dump out my
like api docs to dump out the things for my like functions and classes or could i jam that into
hugo that's a common kind of hybrid path could my thing just dump my info into hugo it's all kind
of this dance between really is this a general content problem is this a like very specific tool problem or can i kind of like jam them both together right into something
yeah yeah yeah that's a that's an interesting problem so maybe a good time to start talking about you know great docs what is it like what's its value prop and positioning with regard
to these other areas?
Well, on your screen, you have package down.
Yes.
It has an origin, yeah.
Actually, coming from R, I can't help but to be a little bit influenced by package down.
I use it a lot in my R projects.
And it kind of felt like there was like a package down sized hole in the Python docs ecosystem, just a little bit, where, you know, you could just point something at your docs and it makes something pretty fast with pretty much no configuration.
That's like the challenge.
Does it present something that's serviceable, like usable right away?
And that's what I was shooting for, and I think that's kind of like where I landed.
And of course, we have tons of options to do way more things, but I wanted to give something that was, you know, you just start it right away, and it gives you something.
Like, for instance, you have doc strings and such, and they all just get captured and put into the API reference section.
And then later on, you would attend to it and organize it and then arrange it and exclude things.
At the very beginning, it would just give you something at least.
So that was kind of like my goal, I think.
Yeah, the up and running super quick is one of the themes, right?
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Because I think, I suspect, maybe a lot of people are getting more into Python now because of agents, AI, LLMs and such, and are spinning up small projects.
And maybe they're even building their documentation sites with using the same things like LLMs.
So getting something up quickly, and maybe the project doesn't last very long, but it's just like something just to get going.
And you don't wanna spend a ton of time on learning like the docs, a new doc system.
So this sort of thing is pretty valuable.
But we still give you the opportunity, of course, to add things and do really cool, sophisticated sites.
But just the up and running part, it was super important to me.
So by default that you can point it at a package or set of Python files or something and say, generate docs around that, and it will look for doc strings and so on, and then generate some kind of hierarchical.
Yeah, exactly.
And we tested it quite a bit on different package layouts, like different packaging systems.
And it seems introspect pretty well done all sorts of variation.
So, and we do test this a lot.
So the promise is that it does give you something.
Yeah.
And you can also create just more static site type stuff as well, yeah?
Yeah. Oh, absolutely.
Yeah.
I think the user guide's a good example.
Like if you click the expandable thing in the top left.
Yeah. Everything's so zoomed.
Yeah, everything's so zoomed on my little small streaming screen.
So yeah, the user guide got it.
It's nice.
The user guide's just a folder in the repo with files in it.
But it's nice, like, that puts up this, like, yeah, more kind of general bit of content.
Where it's not your API reference, which is, like, each individual function explained.
but a more general kind of guide, kind of like a bigger, higher level, like introduction to the package.
But it's nice that to your point, like, can you have more general kind of content?
It's nice.
This is just a folder in the repo.
So getting started with the user guides, like super fast.
Yeah.
And this site is like a demonstration.
We're showing like the great doc site and we're just looking at it and you can just add another directory and like recipes at the top nav, that's just another directory.
And we sort of declared it in our configuration file.
So you can just create something similar to a user guide.
But we sort of treat a user guide as sort of like a first class thing because we, well, I'm a little bit opinionated about how sites, these doc sites should be.
So it kind of serves as a model.
So like the idea is that if someone sees this and says, yeah, I would like something like this, then like three docs would be a good fit.
You just have to sort of emulate what we have here.
do a few things and you've you've pretty much got it beyond the simple sort of like init and then like build you can just go a little bit beyond yeah talk yeah sitting here talking to you makes
me think you know i've got some open source projects i really should have better docs for them maybe maybe i'll try uh working on them with great docs that would be really fun oh yeah i love
your feedback i'm always looking for like ideas and feedback uh right now i'm not gonna be a big deal of it.
But I'm looking for users because this is a brand new project.
So like feedback is a bit scant at this point.
So yeah, let me know how it goes.
Yeah, I will definitely.
One of the things that's nice here that I'm noticing is it's got a lot of a lot of elements of the display that go beyond just standard markdown that I think are really nice.
Like for example, you've got these.
I guess these are probably like little tags or badges.
Yeah, actually tags.
Yeah, and then also you've got a tabbed UI for, like here's how you install it on Mac, Linux, Windows, but in the same little area, right?
You just like click the tab for your OS.
Yeah, we call those tab sets in Quarto.
They're like a Quarto special, really.
Yeah.
They just come part and parcel with Quarto.
Yeah, sweet.
So, yeah, I feel like you can do some nice authorship beyond that.
Like when I was working on my book, I'm like, I want to write it in Markdown, but I also want to have these little call-outs or like an action or, you know, the little sidebar, like how in the heck am I going to get that to come out of Pandoc?
You know what I mean?
I eventually got it to work by basically getting a little pre-parser that would just turn those into HTML and allow the Markdown to have HTML.
I think that's what makes a good user guide a good user guide.
We actually show, not just show the code, but actually show the results.
And you can totally do that with a good user guide.
And that's what I try to demonstrate here in the Great Docs user guide, that we have these things, here's how they look, you can have these too.
Yeah, it definitely looks good.
That's the one thing too with Quarto that like if, if I had to make the case for Quarto for a lot of people doing documentation, it's that it's really easy to run code.
Running code is kind of like most of Quarto's game that it's a, you write, you author using a QMD.
It's essentially a markdown file, but your code blocks can be executed.
Yeah.
So it's really inconvenient for docs, being able to include code snippets and then they get run and their outputs are there.
So that's kind of the impetus I think in this case for Quarto is doing really easy execution of code.
It's possible in other tools and I know MakeDockStrings who I think its author is working with Zensical now too but
of good ways for you to be able to do this as well, like execute code.
But I do think that's one area where people stub their toe a lot is like, oh, like if I'm Polars or Pandas, I'm a data frame library.
I probably want a lot of examples.
And then you get stuck in this like funny dance, like how do I execute the code for my examples?
And so I think tools like Quarto are really kind of aimed at that use case.
Like you're a person running code and generating reports, you know, that have code and that produce graphs and tables and all that.
Yeah, and I think the examples, like being executable, made the great tables examples really powerful.
You can see the code for a table and then see the table right below, like in the actual site, which is, we didn't have to paste that in.
It was basically just generated right there.
Yeah, that's amazing.
Which is actually incredibly, I can put pros around it as well.
So it's like, it reads just like a little mini guide in each doc string.
Does it run at build time or does it somehow run in the website?
Oh, build time.
Yeah.
But you can also.
Web assembly or something fun like that.
You could do that.
Yeah.
Another nice thing, you can freeze it.
So like if you have a bit of code that, or like, let's say you have a blog post and you don't want to rerun it every time, because like over the years, maybe you just,
you like know the code's going to get out of date or it takes a long time to run.
You can do something called freeze.
You can Quarto freeze it.
And that essentially like caches the outputs so that you can re-render it without executing the code every time.
So that's useful.
Like great tables, we have kind of a growing log of blog posts and we don't want to re-execute them every time because that starts to get pretty time consuming.
So we can just freeze their outputs and then they generate super fast.
Another reason you might want to freeze it is you're doing accessing live data off an API or website and you want to talk about the results.
And if it changes, like all of a sudden your pros is like, why are you talking about this?
It doesn't say that.
Well, it used to when I did it.
You might imagine like a bench for our exception example, if it runs a long time or you just accessing some keys on your personal machine.
Freezing is great for that.
You basically throw stuff on your personal computer and you're just sending it off to CI.
Yeah.
I think there's also a million of these things that you encounter when you start generating doc sites or personal content, which is like, yeah, maybe I don't want to run some stuff.
Maybe I want to include a snippet from one thing somewhere else.
Or maybe I want to do like all kinds of like output customization.
I just feel like there's a million little boxes to check.
So that's one.
I mean, one other reason we use Quarto is we belong to the company that created Quarto.
But I think those like little pieces of detail for people generating like scientific documents and stuff goes a long way.
It's pretty wild too because Quarto has a pretty big extension system as well, like pretty active.
So there's like ways, I mean, besides like different output types, there's like extensions and different types of extensions too, like different classes of extensions.
So it goes really neat.
Yeah, Quarto is really neat.
And you all keep talking about Quarto because it's the foundation of what's happening with great tables, right?
It's been a while since I had JJ and Carlos on the podcast to talk about Quarto.
So maybe just give folks a bit of a refresher of what is Quarto and then how that relates back to Great Tables.
Yeah, so Quarto is like an open source publishing system.
So you can make things like sites, like documents, like books, for instance.
You can make presentations.
There's probably a few more missing.
And it's cross language as well.
And you can have code cells.
So it has computational notebooks is what they call them because they have cells, which are basically computational cells, which can accept, which have different engines.
So you can run some R code, run some Python, some Julia, what have you, many other things as well.
And then you can basically render them into documents using Pandoc for the most part, and probably other things too for different output types.
And it just really batteries included.
It has things like you just see on the site, citations, cross-refs.
It's got it all, essentially.
And so how it relates to CoreDoc and to GreatDocs, we're using CoreDoc.
But not really.
I think with CoreDoc, the way I see it is like - and correct me if I'm wrong, Michael - you're creating a reference API, but you're still basically using Quarto.
You're within the Quarto itself.
You're still creating the Quarto config.
But with great docs, it's kind of like Quarto is a bit servica.
We're using it, obviously, but you don't have to know a lot about Quarto.
You can basically get by with just a few things you see, you know, in like the user guide and not have to like go deeply into Quarto.
It sort of like hides it a little bit or doesn't really advertise it as much, even though we're using a lot.
Just for some context, yeah, I mentioned before I developed a tool called quartodoc, which is another documentation generator for Quarto.
So just to clarify the context, yeah, quartodoc is a much more low-level, no frills.
So the IBIS project uses it.
So that's another pretty big Python tool.
but it's like very like simple.
It's more about like dump your API reference and then you're responsible for like customizing your website.
And so it's for people who really want to like be in control and set it all up.
I think Rich is kind of underselling.
I think great docs is just dripping in style.
I think that's the, one of the keys is it's made to be kind of like an all in one, something really nice out of the box that's opinionated.
but I just wanted to clarify for context, QuartoDoc is another tool outside of Quarto.
So I know we've, we've checked a lot of tools out.
Yeah.
But I don't, one thing that's interesting is I know, like when we look at great docs, it's easy to see like some of the stuff that jumps out, but there's actually, I think to Rich's credit,
there's a ton of like little things inside great docs that you almost don't notice until you need them.
like there's a million little pieces to doc sites and some of them are actually pretty intriguing like if you go to the great docs API reference I think it kind of like speaks to Rich's
style that he's included a ton of stuff out of the box for this including this little like
filter bar so if you click on the top left there's a you can sort of like filter on the page
for different pieces that's like yeah i think i think for just to illustrate the difference so quarterdoc is a really bare bones tool it's like we generate an api for you great docs like this
thing this filter bar where you can like type in it and it shows you live on the page like it filters your reference items.
That's just pure rich, just like wilding out on what docs could be.
And I think there are like a million little examples of this kind of in great docs.
Kind of, yeah.
Because I find little things that annoy me and I want to fix them.
But, and so this is my, this is almost like a Python site generator for me in lots of ways.
but I'm hoping that other people feel these little pain points as well.
I've certainly felt it.
I've gone to documentation sites and searched for stuff on there, and then you see a little spinner, searching, searching.
Static site, what are we doing?
Why am I waiting?
This doesn't make any sense to me, but okay.
Yeah.
Even the CLI button, like, oh, sorry, if you click that, that's like if you have a command line interface for your tool,
which is so hot today like ai loves command line interfaces uh Claude Codes just bash executing
everything you know a lot of people have clis um it i think it also speaks a lot to richest
that he created this spot for your cli docs to live um pretty important and then at the top right If you look, there's like a copy.
You can copy the whole page to Markdown or view it as Markdown.
I never would have thought of that.
Like to me, I would never go that far to give people something nice.
I don't know.
I don't know if I'm just like a curmudgeony engineer.
I think Rich is just dreaming up like, I don't know, different ways you could interact with docs, copy the page to Markdown.
and i don't doubt that it's like incredibly useful i to me this strikes me i think it's very useful yeah yeah the when i saw that table graph for great tables like breaking apart the table into
every little piece this strikes me as rich again like imagining every little thing a doc site could
do so i think that's why i'm so kind of gassed up about yeah that's this is delightful and we're
going to come back to AI stuff later, but we don't have that much time left, honestly, guys. We've been talking and not making a lot of progress because it's really, we're just diving into it. It's so fun. I know.
It's so fun.
But I can easily see I'm working on a project and I've got Claude or some codex or whatever, and it's just not getting it for a certain
function just go to the docs hit copy pages markdown and just go no ai this is the docs read it because given it a markdown result of what this is versus the all the nav and all the stuff and
it's trying to understand what's the essence of the page if it you tell it to just go to the page
it's really really different yeah it's been more immediate i think and also you can like change into the URL if you really want to, to.md and just give it the URL.
So many ways to do it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I love that.
So it said html.md.
Yeah.
That's really cool.
So if you or Claude Code are reading the docs, you know, a lot of good.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's cool.
Did I do that for Talk Python? I think I did.
Yeah.
If you do that on Talk Python, by the way, you can do, just put.md on the end of any episode name, and it gives you the markdown equivalent of that as well.
That's all the rage.
Yeah, so, I mean, we're on the same vibes here.
I'm loving it, you know what I mean?
Yeah, and it might even help for context.
I'd be curious to hear your, like, when you added that markdown and some of your motivation for markdownifying your site.
I didn't do it for people.
I did it for AI and SEO.
For the machine.
Yeah, for the machine.
So I added an LLMs.txt to try to get the AIs to understand the podcast better.
And some of the things that I gave it was this ability to just put Mark down at the end.
But also I added like a CLI and an MCP and different things for an API, search API.
I'm like, okay, AI.
There's 7.5 million words of content over 11 years.
I want you to know about it and be able to use it.
How many ways can I imagine giving something to it?
And this renderer's markdown was certainly one of them.
That's great.
Yeah, that's awesome.
I also added some silly stuff that's like for just for me.
Because I've got, for example, I've got to update, say, the YouTube recommendations or listings.
After the live stream, I want them to have links and stuff.
So I can say.youtube on the end, and it gives me the contents for the YouTube render.
So it kind of was building on this, like how can I help myself be more efficient, but also a machine?
So anyway, that's the story.
It's like Docs is workflow, really, right?
It fits in nicely.
Yeah.
So circling back around, I'm really impressed with some of these little nuances that are super nice.
I think that's great.
Yeah, thank you.
Great to have some more further on this.
It's basically just nicing up the docs and make them good for humans, but also consumable by LLMs or digits.
Rich, it's a fad.
We don't really need to worry about it.
It's going to go away.
It's a little gas, yeah.
The bubble's going to burst.
We can just ignore it.
It's going to be fine.
No.
So let's talk.
I want to talk about a couple of things here.
So let's just do like a real quick little walkthrough of maybe getting started with this.
Because it's honestly not a whole lot to get started, but give us this.
One of you all walk us through the quick starts just so people kind of know what's involved.
Yeah.
So really that command, like great docs init, that'll make the file that is basically what you need for the build.
And with a lot of testing, it should work on many different like Python package layouts and types.
So you just need that.
Of course, yeah, install great docs, install Quarto as well.
So we got that as well before that.
But once you have those things, it should do what it says on the screen, basically show you stuff in the terminal, which is all positive.
It's creating that great docs.yaml file.
And it should be pretty minimal what's in there.
It should actually also be a little bit dynamic.
Based on your project, it'll craft the correct great docs.yaml file or the config file.
And then you could go ahead and customize, but you might just jump to building your documentation because that's the next easiest thing.
It's just another command, great docs build.
And what you get is a great hyphen docs directory in your working directory.
And that contains like the site folder.
But you don't really have to worry about that because you have another command called great docs preview, which will basically launch like a web server and then, you know, put the site in your default browser, basically just like let you see the site locally.
And then because I'm a big fan of letting people know what's going on, so it should be totally a black box I give on this page, like a structure, the basic structure of how it should look in your working directory.
But that's kind of it.
And I believe the next step for most people will just be getting this on CI if they're satisfied and then just working from there, like modifying their initialization, not initialization, their config file to give the site more customization personality.
and there'll be authoring guides and things like that.
Very cool.
So you've got the really nice watch feature.
So great docs build --watch.
Yes.
Which feels very Hugo to me.
Like you're going to build it so you can look at it, but then you want to edit it.
So just if you see any changes, just rebuild, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Small sites will build fast, but this is way faster, obviously.
So yeah, this is pretty essential for iterating, especially initially.
Yeah, and what about this versions?
This is an interesting aspect of the project.
Versions.
Well, essentially you may have multiple tagged versions of your site and this is kind of like a wild thing.
You can have different documentation sites based on your version 'cause you have, for instance, new things in your API.
Right, people maybe know that from Python where you can go up here and drop down.
Exactly, like version selector.
So this is kind of like just seeing certain versions of your site.
And it gives you a selector.
On the Great Talks site itself, we have a selector which is maximal.
It has every single version from the very first.
And you can cruise in there, and you'll see that there'll be way less in the earliest versions.
If you look at the user guide for 0.1, which gives a little icon, a little scary, it's unsupported.
If you look at the user guide, it's pretty sparse.
It's not as long as the other one.
And if you look at the reference as well, it'll have less items.
So it's aware of like what's available in which versions.
And so you sort of set that up yourself or you can just do it through that command.
Is that based on get tags or what is that?
Based on get tags, yeah, that's right.
Okay, I was wondering how does it even know?
Yeah, you have to give it some information.
Like you have to of course get the tags, but if you actually configure it to do what it's doing here, like make the site, you just change your configuration to have, it's basically just like a small config that you have to do.
And you can set labels and things like that.
Can I wildcard it or have it somehow pick up all the versions?
I mean, you don't want to pick up all tags, but it'd be like, I don't think we have like star dot star.
I don't think we have version expressions like that yet.
Yeah,
but not yet.
Okay.
You know, throw it in there.
I'm just thinking if I have a project with 27 versions over time.
Yeah, you probably wouldn't do it through like this interface, like Great Docs Build.
This is just for like a very quick comparison.
Got it.
But if you would do it, like you'd probably put that in the config file.
And you'd have to manually edit those.
But I think with a sclatch or something like that would be better.
And there's an API, of course, if you want to just have a control.
Yeah,
it's kind of, you wouldn't do this, but it's just, I threw it in there.
Well, probably because your commands use that, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Might as well just let people know.
Just being transparent,
I suppose, yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
where where do we go next let's let's cover just a couple a couple of remaining things here while we're well we got time so what about open source sustainability like i know you all
deposit are doing a lot of things to open source yeah your work and so on
yeah uh well we're pretty much like full-time doing open source work um so essentially and And so I think these projects have long life cycles with the same maintainer for long periods of time,
which is great for project stability and things like that.
And we're accountable for issues that come in and for releases and making sure it's not dead projects all the way down or whatever.
So I think that's a great thing.
And for instance, like Great Tables, I've been in it since the beginning, GT, which is where it came from.
since 2017 uh so i think that that helps a lot adds a lot of credibility to these projects that are not just being abandoned there's no fear of it being abandoned or things like that there's
there's a person there at least yeah and i think um posit posit's fun an interesting business model
that's been long-term sustaining but still allows you as you said sort of work in open source it's maybe speak to that either one of you real quick.
Michael, would you?
True.
Yeah, it's really interesting.
And it's almost like not diving crazy deep and doing a podcast.
My favorite thing to say to people is that like we have a really large open source engineering team, dozens of open source engineers.
People often ask like, how does Posit pay the bills for people to work on open source?
And my favorite thing to say is like, we have a bunch of boring enterprise tools and I'm no shade on pause. I actually think that this is the best case scenario.
Like we have a lot of tools that solve really painful problems.
If you're an enterprise, they could be useful in other settings, but it's like, how do I run a report every day um or how do i host like jupyter notebooks or vs code for my say like data team
or our studio those those essentially pay the bills that's posit right right deposit teams
you've got a team of data scientists but you don't necessarily have a dev ops team but you still want
to have their stuff running reliably right yeah yeah and it's a it's a hard problem if you're a company, right?
These are kind of tricky problems. Or you have like a really mean IT team.
A cruel IT team could like hamstring you for years.
But that's just to say like we get to work on open source because these tools exist.
And I think Posit exists, I think, because the maintainers care so much about open source.
I will say in terms of sustainability, one interaction I've really liked over the years is like in the docs realm, there's this person, I only know him as Paawomoy,
his GitHub handle, I think it's Timothée or Timothy in France, or France, I think.
But he maintains the tools upstream of tools like Portadoc and GreatDocs.
And we've interacted a bit in the past where I've done PRs on his tools.
One's called Griff.
And I think that's such an important part of sustainability too, is that he works on a documentation tool, make doc strings, but we're all able to collaborate on his tool, Griff, that actually powers all of our documentation sites.
So I think that's a really important piece.
I think to your point about being at PyCon and seeing people, I think us as open source maintainers, chatting and even contributing and working on say like upstream tools is a really important part of keeping
the ecosystem healthy and sustainable.
We're not like multiple doc tools competing to degree.
I do think they compete, but ultimately like we're working on open source because we're passionate.
And I think it helps to collaborate on our kind of like shared tools.
Yeah.
A hundred percent agree.
Very cool.
Now, Rich, you mentioned that it's a pretty new project.
Yeah.
Where are we going?
What's next?
What's on the roadmap?
Yeah, lots of things.
I even have a roadmap on the site if anyone's interested.
But I think it'll be a lot more documentation for different things, like new things.
The other day, I was suggested to create documentation for MCP servers.
I was like, good idea.
we don't really have that and there's you know it's it's pretty easy to document json essentially so we can take that apart parse that and present something that's a good point because if you look
at the mcp servers they don't have structure in the way that traditional projects do right they don't just have like a separate function for each thing they've got this kind of weird
invocation entry point where you pass like the tool you want to use and yeah it's a real different
documentation yeah suggestions things like that uh so i think we could do a pretty good job there that's the idea is pretty new but like i guess we're yeah just trying to be where or go where
things are going and yeah so would that somehow show itself as like where you've got the um the api and the cli would there also be an mcp or what do you think it's gonna be a bit crowded so i'm
rethinking i know yeah yeah i was like i don't really know what's it like but no that's not quite it.
There's one or two more things.
So it might be just a drop down nav, like a drop down on the top nav, I'm thinking.
So that's part of what I have to think about.
But there's things like that. And also a recent thing we just did, and this is very new, so it's almost like it's new enough, is like skills, like publishing skills and making them available and making them browsable, right?
So on the great, it's not top level.
If you go to the first page, there's like a sidebar on the right, which gives you a lot of metadata.
And one of the first few things is skills.
And that gives you like a page on how to install these skills. So it's kind of like a, almost like a way not to just distribute, but a way to sort of like get ahold of skills.
And there's a nice little sort of like disclosure there, install these skills, easy instructions on how to do such things.
And you can just browse the skills below and see what's there.
You might just take bits of them, make your own skill, or you might just say, no, these all look good.
I'll just follow these instructions and install them for my project or globally.
This is super, yeah, super cool.
Yeah, that kind of brings me to the last thing I want to talk about is the AI-ification.
And by that, I don't mean, how do I, are you using AI to write it or not?
I imagine there's some degree of that or whatever, but if I'm a person with a project, a package or something I want to document, AI is really good at going,
well, let me pull out all these pieces and then sketch some stuff out for you.
and I can see now that you pointed me in the right direction, that there's a whole AI section, like how do AIs work with great docs, right?
And so you've got the llms.txt, which is really nice.
I referenced that before.
People don't know there's an, this comes from, I believe from Jeremy Howard.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, we looked at this closely, yeah.
Yeah, so did I, and I find it super interesting.
The idea is that if you, there's a robots.txt and a sitemap.xml.
These are standard web things on sites that humans rarely use to get any value from, but machines and traditionally search engines really, really do.
And so what do we put for AI to make it better, LLMs and so on, is this LLMs.txt file that describes in Markdown to the LLMs how you can better work with this.
So with that said, you all have that, right?
So you've got your llms.txt and the full one.
You know, this is not something I'm doing.
Maybe I need to do a full one.
This one's interesting.
It's a lot.
So basically, it's the entire bit of documentation distilled down.
Not distilled, but like written as one file, essentially.
All doc strings mashed together, you might say, including guide material as well.
Nice.
Yeah, and you've got these skills as well, which is looking super interesting.
And also pretty neat, the CLI that you've created.
a couple things on that first of all that it will actually install the skills yeah so if uh you're
an author you would just use great docs install skill install and then they may be the name of your library nice for other people that's what other people see on their i think it's an interesting
piece because if i'm i i've done and i haven't seen the skills piece a lot but if i'm understanding rich too this means great docs is also for like kind of all users right like people who
are interested in reading or consuming docs or using it with ai is that right yeah yeah that's
that's kind of where we're going more and more yeah so it looks like you're really leaning into making great docs something that works well if you're trying to generate docs and maintain them
with ai right we also want if you point your your agent at this site it should be able to find these things pretty quickly and you can actually like use tools like there's one called what do agents
You can put it in your URL and it'll show you what pieces are picked up by different agents.
It actually simulates it really nicely.
And I found that this sort of validated things that different agents do pick up LLMs.txt, LLMs.full, and there's other little pieces of metadata, things that go in the meta tag
that can be picked up to robots.txt and very.except, things like that.
so we're working towards making this even easier like you just point at the site or point any site that you author using great docs and your agent should get should be able to find things pretty
quick very exciting i love it okay and also just you know you mentioned that there's the cli
or i don't know what i was mentioning but the fact that there is a cli is another really great enablement.
You can say, hey, Claude or Codex or any of these tool using agentic AI is just like, here's the CLI to do the things.
Here's the docs and the skill.
Make this happen.
Yeah.
And you can even, the skills that I include in great docs could be used to author your own great docs site.
There's all sorts of things in there for just how it works and writing pages.
They're kind of split up into multiple name skills.
So you can, you can just use that or make your own skills.
Yeah.
Yeah. Very neat.
All right. Two really quick things.
I know we're pretty much out of time for you guys.
One, what I get out of this is just a static site and I can just host it on any static site place.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's really good.
So it could be Netlify. It could be GitHub pages for me on.
We provide some fine-grained instructions for different hosts and things like that.
GitHub pages seems like a nice default.
But of course, yeah, Netlify, Vercel, things like that.
We provide some hints that it works.
Yeah, okay.
Very neat.
For me, I was running on Netlify for a while, but I actually had my monitoring software monitoring it, and it actually went down surprisingly often.
I'm like, why is my static site going down?
This makes no sense.
So I've ended up recently, I've already got like a big server with tons of sites.
So I just, I'll just have a config on Nginx that just runs it, you know?
And so there's a lot of options there.
Yeah.
It's so interesting.
Not, not to dwell on it, but I do remember you saying, I think on a podcast with Hugo, talking about your Hugo Van Anderson, your approach that you're, you have way less downtime than even some of the cloud providers.
I know.
It's really weird.
It's interesting to hear about it.
I could go for hours on this, so be careful there, Michael.
I find it really interesting that you just, the extreme simplicity of like I've got a server and either it's got a self-contained Python and database runtime or it's even a static site.
That goes a long ways, you know, a really long ways instead of like all the 100 connected services powered by some dynamic thing underneath.
And if one of them goes down, it takes a chunk with it.
Yeah, yeah, for sure.
Yeah, yeah.
So that was, maybe that was my last question.
I think just the deployment side of things is really interesting.
So it sounds like just wherever, right?
Anything that serves static files, you're good to go.
Pretty much, yeah.
Because you get the site directory and you just go with that.
Like it's a complete site in a directory.
Yeah, okay.
So now I remember the second thing I wanted to talk about was if I go over to the user guide and I do a quick start, you show me the structure and I get this here, this yourprojectgreatdocs.aml, greatdocs, et cetera, et cetera.
So it looks like the recommendation is to have great docs as a sub directory of your actual things that it is documenting.
Is that right?
Sort of, but you don't have to keep it.
I mean, like, it's just going to appear there when you render locally.
And you can look at the site.
You can preview it.
But you can just delete it.
Like, you can have it on CI or whatever, like, on your CI system.
I see.
Or however you're deploying it.
Like, your steps could be build and then copy and then delete the folder, not necessarily the YAML.
Oh, yeah.
You want to keep that.
Yeah.
That's config.
So, commit that.
And hopefully, I sort of, like, outlined it here on this page, what should be like, you know, committed.
And we automatically .gitignore some things too.
So you don't accidentally commit things you don't have to.
If I want to do the freeze though, I probably have to keep it. Yeah.
No, we actually work around that.
So we do like a, like a pre, we got a little system there. So like, I know it wipes everything out, but we have a freeze mechanism that sort of works around this sort of like ephemeral nature of things.
Interesting.
Yeah. So it's four rupees.
So it just doesn't.
Yeah.
Very interesting.
Okay.
Final, final thoughts.
People are interested in this.
They want to get started.
What do you tell them?
Yeah, just check out the site.
I'm hoping you'll be not wowed, but that it will resonate a little bit.
And the site should demonstrate what's possible.
And, again, even just have your agent have some AI.
Take a small Python packet to yours and see what it could do.
Take it for a little spin.
and if there's anything that you think is missing or lacking, just drop me a line through the issues.
That's basically it.
Can I publish on Read the Docs?
I don't think we have that yet.
I actually never even considered that.
That's just such one of the standard places to put docs.
Not necessarily required, but it'd be interesting.
Okay, I'm going to log that down.
It's already like a good one.
All right.
We're rewriting the roadmap live here.
Yeah.
That's a toughie.
You threw down the gauntlet, you know?
This is it.
Wow.
Sounds good.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, I really appreciate you both being here.
Michael, you want to have a final word as well of inspiration for folks?
What a great question.
My final nudge might be like, we talked a lot about generating docs, the kind of technical activity.
I do think there's this world of how do you write docs?
Like what should your content be?
Yeah.
And what should your sections of your doc site be?
Obviously, we're saying goodbye.
So we don't want to open that can of worms.
But I just wanted to cast a light on that.
That is a freaky big area on its own.
I don't have great answers.
I'm just throwing some problems on people's laps.
I think that's a neat, freaky area that is worth checking out.
I think what you're doing is you're setting the stage for another episode in the future.
Yeah, that's right.
We're just trying to make it a three, like a trilogy.
We're trying to get our third visit.
Perfect.
All right.
Well, Rich, Michael, thanks for being here.
It's great as always.
Thanks for having me.
Yep.
Bye.
Thanks.